Zirkonium is a program for sound spatialization. It was originally developed for the ZKM Klangdom, a 47 loudspeaker environment installed in the ZKM‘s Kubus, but it has been designed to be used in conjunction with out loudspeaker environments as well.

The aim of the software is to simplify the use of space as a compositional parameter. Zirkonium can be used as a stand-alone application for creating a multi-track, spatialized composition or simply as a tool for spatialization within another program. The capability to read and playback sound ﬁles in a variety of formats (including AIFF/AIFC, WAV, SDII, SND, MP3, AAC) with arbitrary numbers of channels is built in, as is the ability to incorporate live input from an audio device. Zirkonium also provides the means to compose, store, and playback a spatial choreography. In cases where there is no need for realtime audio processing or algorithmic control of sound source position, the entire piece can be realized within Zirkonium itself. For more complex situtations, Zirkonium can present itself as an audio device to other programs and can accept control data via Open Sound Control (OSC). This lets the user work in their preferred environment (Digital Performer, Logic, Max/ MSP, Super Collider, etc.), using Zirkonium for multi-channel panning. An Audio Unit plugin, ZirkOSC, has been developed at Université de Montréal by the Groupe de Recherche en Immersion Spatiale (GRIS) to control the Zirkonium frorm any Audio Unit compatible audio sequencer. It is available on Google Code as well.

The manual is available online: http://illposed.com/ZirkoniumManual.pdf